A River Filled with the Amṛta of Love
A Liturgy for Saving and Releasing the Lives of Animals
by Metrul Tenzin Gyatso

Homage to Avalokiteśvara!
If you wish to save and release the lives of animals, begin by taking refuge:
changchub nyingpor chi kyi bar
Until I realise the essence of enlightenment,
sangye nam la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the buddhas,
chö dang changchub sempa yi
And likewise in the Dharma,
tsok la ang deshyin kyab su chi
And the assembly of bodhisattvas.
Three times.
Second, generate bodhicitta, the heart of the awakened mind:
jitar ngön gyi deshek kyi
Just as the sugatas of former times
changchub tuk ni kyepa dang
Aroused the bodhicitta
changchub sempé labpa la
And established themselves by stages
dedak rimshyin nepa tar
In the training of a bodhisattva,
deshyin dro la pen döndu
Just so, for the benefit of beings
changchub sem ni kyé gyi shying
I will arouse bodhicitta
deshyindu ni labpa la ang
And likewise I will train
rimpa shyindu labpar gyi
Progressively in those disciplines.1
Three times.
dengdü dak tsé drebu yö
Today, my birth has been fruitful.
mi yi sipa lekpar tob
I have well obtained a human existence.
dering sangye rik su kyé
Today I am born into the family of the buddhas.
sangye sé su da gyur to
I have become a son or daughter of the buddhas.2
dani dak gi chiné kyang
From now on, at all costs, I will perform
rik dang tünpé lé tsam té
The actions befitting to my family.
kyönmé tsünpé rik di la
I will not be a stain
nyokpar mingyur detar ja
On this faultless noble family.3
longwé chak dar pungpo lé
Just like a blind person
jitar rinchen nyepa tar
Happening upon a priceless jewel in a heap of rubbish,
deshyin jishyik tar té né
So, through some fortunate coincidence,
changchub sem di dak la kyé
The bodhicitta has been born in me.4
dak gi dering kyobpa tamché kyi
Today, in the presence of all the protectors,
chen ngar drowa deshek nyi dang ni
I invite all beings to the state of sugata,
bardu dé la drön duwö zin gyi
And, meanwhile, to happiness and bliss:
lha dang lhamin lasok gawar gyi
Gods, asuras and others—rejoice!5
Then recite the following verses for the main part of the practice:
kyé, marik timuk wang gyurwé
Kyé! Through the power by ignorance and delusion,
khorwa düdrö ngöntok shar
The experiences of various animals in saṃsāra arise.
dé dok chöying yeshe kyi
As a means of averting them and bringing about
kyilkhor ngön du gyurwé tab
The mandala of dharmadhātu wisdom,
tendrel choga döndam gyi
This rite of auspicious connection,
chakgyé tab dir luwamé
Sealed with the absolute, is unfailing.
Imagine that all the creatures are being taken under the care of the Three Jewels and recite:
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye rinchen tsuktor chen la chaktsal
lo chö do kyab su chi o
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Ratna-śikhin, Crest of Jewels, I pay
homage to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Three times.
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye shakya tubpa la chaktsal lo chö
do kyab su chi o
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Śākyamuni, Sage of the Śākyas, I pay
homage to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Three times.
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo öpakmé la chaktsal lo chö
do kyab su chi o
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Protector Amithāba, Buddha of Boundless
Light, I pay homage to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Three times.
changchub sempa sempa chenpo nyingjé chenpo dang denpa pakpa chenrezik wangchuk la chaktsal
lo chö do kyab su chi o
Bodhisattva, Mahāsattva, embodiment of great compassion, Noble Lord Avalokiteśvara, I pay homage
to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Three times.
The essence mantra of Amitābha:
om amidhewa ayu siddhi hung hrih
oṃ amitābha6 āyusiddhi hūṃ hrīḥ
The essence mantra of Avalokiteśvara:
om mani pemé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
If you wish you can add further prayers or mantras. Then recite the teaching on the profound
subject of interdependence:
namo, chö nam tamché gyu lé jung
Namo! All dharmas originate from causes.
dé gyu deshyin shekpé sung
The Tathāgata has taught these causes,
gyu la gokpa gang yinpa
And also that which puts a stop to these causes—
gejong chenpö diké sung
This too has been taught by the Great Śramaṇa.
dikpa chiyang mija shying
Commit not a single unwholesome action,
gewa pünsum tsokpar ché
Cultivate a wealth of virtue,
rang gi sem ni yongsu dul
Tame completely this mind of ours—
di ni sangye tenpa yin
This is the teaching of the buddhas.
Continue to recite whatever prayers come to your mind. Then recite:
om namo bhagawate | aparimita ayurjnana subinischita tejo rajaya | tathagataya arhate samyaksambuddhaya
| tadyatha om punye punye maha punye | aparimita punye aparimita punya jnana sambharo
pachite | om sarva samskara parishuddha dharmate gagana samudgate svabhava vishuddhe
mahanaya parivare svaha |
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya
| tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite
| oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre
svāhā |7
Three times.
Imagine that all these creatures have triumphed over all that has put their life in danger and
that they attain the siddhi of power over longevity in all their lives. Next, place blessed
substances in their mouths and transform everything into emptiness by reciting the following
mantra:
om sobhava shuddho sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpanyi du gyur tongpé ngang lé mik jé lü pung kham kyemché tamché namdak dewa chenpö rangshyin
chöpé trinpung sam gyi mi khyabpar gyur
Everything dissolves into emptiness. Out of the state of emptiness, the body, aggregates, elements,
and sense fields of the beings that are the focal point of the practice become inconceivable
cloud banks of offerings, whose nature is complete purity and great bliss.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Three times. Then, bless them with the sky-treasury mantra:
nama sarva tatagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham udgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
|
namaḥ sarvatathāgatebhyo viśvamukhebhyaḥ | sarvathā kham udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gaganakhaṃ svāhā
||
kyé, chok chü shying na shyukpa yi
Kyé! To the buddhas residing in the ten directions’ pure realms,
sangye chö dang gendün dang
To the Dharma, and to the Saṅgha,
lama yidam khandrö tsok
To the gathering of gurus, devas, and ḍākinīs,
chökyong damchen gyatso la
To the dharmapālas and oath-bound guardians,
chöpa dampa bulwa ni
I make this sacred offering.
sok uk nam shé denpa yi
May all sentient beings, endowed with consciousness
semchen di ni tsé dü lé
And the breath that supports their vitality, be freed
tar té jikme ukyung tob
Of all that endangers their life and be relieved of their fears.
di yi pung kham kyemché nam
Their aggregates, elements, and sense fields
rangshyin namdak chöpé trin
Are clouds of offerings, by nature completely pure.
namkha khyabpar tro jé ching
They bring pleasure that fills the entire sky,
döyön künden dewa ché
The great bliss of everything to delight the senses.
chimé chemchok drubpé dzé
May these substances that bring supreme immortality,
mi tamepar yong sharwé
Manifested here in a boundless and infinite array,
khyé nam tukdam nyenpo kang
Fulfil your sacred and weighty pledges,
gyé rab chok dangden gyur chik
And bring the most sublime and supreme delight!8
dak dang semchen tamché kün
May I and all infinite sentient beings—
dümin chiwé kek lé tar
Be freed from all obstacles that bring untimely death.
shintu yün ring tso gyur shying
May we live for an extremely long time,
pung kham nyampa sorchü ching
And may any degeneration of the aggregates and elements be restored!
tenyö dangchü sö su min
May the vital essence of the inanimate and animate universe be rejuvenated!
tsé pal trakdang ziji gyé
May our longevity and wellbeing, our radiance and splendour flourish!
nemé chö jor pelwar shok
May we be free from illness and possess the wealth of Dharma!
gé di khanyam drowa kün
Through this merit
kyechi lé dé dorjé ku
May all infinite sentient beings
gönpo tsepakmé pa yi
Attain the vajrakāya, beyond birth and death,
gopang dampa tobpar shok
The sublime level of Lord Amitāyus.
That being recited, if you wish to add a long-life prayer for the guru:
ditar drubpé lek jé tendrel gyi
Through the auspicious connection of having done this good act
palden lamé kutsé rabten shying
May the form and life of the glorious gurus be perfectly stable,
mejung trinlé chok chur rabtu khyab
May their wondrous activities fill all the ten directions
tuk kyi shyedön yongsu drubpar shok
And may the wishes of their awakened minds be completely fulfilled!
Then recite aspiration prayers:
ho, khorwa menpé go sumwor
Ho! Casting aside the three doors of the lower realms of saṃsāra,
tarpé sabön lek tab tü
Through the power of planting well the seed of liberation,
gyalten dar shying semchen dé
May the buddhas' teachings spread and sentient beings be happy,
ngensong dukngal yong sel né
May the suffering of the lower realms be entirely cleared away,
tarpa dang ni namkhyen chok
And may everyone attain liberation and perfect peace,
nyurdu tokmé ngönpar shok
Swiftly and without any form of obstacle!
mi tsang lü diwor bar gyur ma tak
As soon as we have discarded this unclean body,
dewachen du dzü té kyewar shok
May we miraculously take birth in Sukhāvatī, realm of great bliss.
kyé ma tak tu sa chu rab drö né
As soon as we are born there, having traversed the bhūmis,
trulpé chok chur shyendön jepar shok
May we send our emanations in all directions, to benefit beings.
semchen tamché dé dang den gyur chik
May all sentient beings be happy.
ngendro tamché taktu tongpar shok
May all the lower realms be forever empty.
changchub sempa gang dak sar shyukpa
May the aspirations of all the bodhisattvas
dé dak kun gyi mönlam drubpar shok
Of the various bhūmis be fulfilled!
shyen nö shyi ché pong la gompé tü
Through the power of training to abandon both harming others and the attitude behind it,
milam na yang dik sem minjung shying
May the thought of doing harm arise not even in my dreams;
changchub sem dang namyang mindral bar
May everything be auspicious for me to have that perfect discipline,
tsultrim pünsum tsokpé tashi shok
Which never diverges from the altruistic mind of bodhicitta!
Thus recite aspiration prayers and in conclusion dedicate the merit.

The liturgies for this ritual were drawn from the omniscient Mipham Gyatso’s “Glorious Gift
of Longevity and Granting All Desires: A Liturgy for Saving Lives” and Dodrupchen Jikmé Trinlé
Özer’s “Stairway to Great Bliss: A Method for Planting the Seed of Liberation in Animals,
a Supplementary Practice of the Supreme Path of Noble Dharma and Great Bliss” as well
as other texts. To these text were further added the names of buddhas and some dhāraṇī mantras
that are said to be particularly beneficial for animals. Without defiling these writings
with my own words, this joyful grove for living beings, the beneficial practice of saving
and releasing lives, was compiled by Tenzin Gyatso. Virtue!
↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, III. 23–24↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.26↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.27↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra,
III.28↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.34↑ It is thought that amidhewa is the Tibetan pronunciation
of the Sanskrit Amitābha, just as bendza is Tibetan pronunciation of the Sanskrit
vajra.↑ This is the dhāraṇī from The Sublime Sūtra of the Great Vehicle entitled “Boundless
Life and Wisdom” (D 675, ārya-aparimita-āyurjñāna-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra, ‘phags pa tshe
dang ye shes dpag tu med pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo)↑ These two lines refer to
the main goals of the gaṇacakra practice, namely the fulfilment (bskang ba) and delight (dgyes
pa) of the assembled deities.