Increasing Life and Vitality
A Practice for Freeing Lives
by Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo

Homage to the Guru and the Blessed Protector Amitāyus, the Buddha of Boundless Life!

The great accomplished master Vāgīśvarakīrti stated:1If you save the lives of birds, fish, deer,
thieves, Snakes, and any others beings to be killed,Your life, even if it were to be
short, Will inevitably be extended.
Saving the lives of creatures who are certain to be killed is taught to be the best of all longevity
practices. Such has been taught in countless sūtras, tantras, and śāstras, as illustrated
by the statement above. This fact can be established through reasoning as well. Moreover,
since freeing lives results in benefits beyond comprehension, intelligent people
should put ever more effort into the practice of freeing lives.
In general, free the lives of those animals that are in your possession, your heart filled with
compassion, and refrain from killing animals yourself or selling them off to others who
would kill them; rather, look after the animals’ welfare that that live in your surroundings.
If you can do this, and you seal the roots of this virtuous deed with dedication and
aspiration prayers, you will accomplish the goal at hand and have no need for any other rituals.
Should you wish to engage in a slightly more elaborate form of this practice, as would be appropriate
on a particular day or occasion, then you can follow one of the pith instructions
taught in the Early Translation School, such as making the animal into a support for a Dharma
protector.
Should you wish to just perform a ritual accompanied by the recitation of verses of auspiciousness,
dedication and aspiration, as is common, then the following practice is suitable on
special occasions, such as within the Miracle Month,2or on the eighth day,3 new-moon day,
or full-moon day of any lunar month.
If your main goal is to extend someone’s life, you should perform the ritual at dawn on the
person’s ascending life-force day, during a favorable astrological juncture.4
Whatever the occasion, arrange the animals to be released before you, and recite verses of refuge
three times:
Refuge & Bodhicitta
sangye chö dang tsok kyi chok nam la
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
changchub bardu dak ni kyab su chi
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
dak gi jin sok gyipé sönam kyi
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
Thus, recite the refuge verse, three times over.
Four Immeasurables
semchen tamché dewa dang dewé gyu dang denpar gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness and the causes of happiness!
dukngal dang dukngal gyi gyu dang dralwar gyur chik
May they be free from suffering and the causes of suffering!
dukngal mepé dewa dampa dang mindralwar gyur chik
May they never be separated from the sacred happiness devoid of suffering!
nyering chakdang nyi dang dralwé tangnyom chenpo la nepar gyur chik
And may they dwell in boundless equanimity that is free from attachment and aversion!
Thus cultivate the four immeasurables.
Reciting the Names of the Buddhas
If you wish to practice more elaborately, at this point you may recite the names of the buddhas
and particular dhāraṇīs many times. This will bring great benefits, such as planting the
seed of liberation in the animal’s mind-stream. Even if you’re unable to do so, simply
recite once the following:
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo ö pak tu mepa la chaktsal
lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Protector Amithāba.
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo mitrukpa la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Protector Akṣobhya.
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye rinchen tsuktor chen la chaktsal
lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Ratnaśikhin.
Next, pay homage to the Seven Sugatas:5
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye tsen lekpar yong drak pal gyi gyalpo
la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Glorious King whose Name
is Widely Renowned.6
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye khepa ziji kyi drayang kyi gyalpo
la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, King who Sounds the Energy
of Virtue.7
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye ser zang drimé rinchen nang tulshyuk
drubpa la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, The One with the Accomplishment
of the Vow of the Radiance of Gold and Fine Stainless Jewels.8
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye nya ngen mé chok pal la chal tsal
lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, the One without Anguish
and with Supreme Glory.9
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye chö drak gyatsö yang la chaktsal
lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, The Roaring One with
an Ocean of Dharma-Renown.10
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye chö gyatso chok gi lö nampar rolpa
ngönpar khyenpé gyalpo la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, King who is an Ocean
of Dharma with the Best of Minds, Mastery, and Super-Knowledge.11
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye men gyi la baiduryé ö la chaktsal
lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Master of Medicine with
the Radiance of Lapis-Lazuli.12
And finally, pay homage to Buddha Śākyamuni:
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye shakya tubpa la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Śākyamuni.
Recitation of the Mantras
Next, chant mantras, such as the following ones, loud and clear:
The Six-Syllable Mantra of Avalokiteśvara
om mani pemé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ ||
The Dhāraṇī of Buddha Akṣobhya
namo ratna trayaya | namo bhagavate akshobhyaya tathagataya arhate samyak sambuddhaya | tadyatha
| om kamkani kamkani rotsani rotsani trotani trotani trasani trasani pratihana pratihana
sarva karma paramparani me sarva sato nantsa soha
namo ratna-trayāya | namo bhagavate akṣobhyāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya | tadyathā
| oṃ kaṃkaṇi kaṃkaṇi rocani rocani troṭani troṭani trāsani trāsani pratihana pratihana
sarva karma paramparāṇi me sarva sattvānāñca svāhā ||
The Dhāraṇī of the Eleven-faced Avalokiteśvara
namo ratna trayaya | nama arya jnana sagara vairotsana byuha radzaya tathagataya arhate samyak
sambuddhaya | nama sarva tathagate bhyah arhata bhyah samyak sambuddha bhyah | nama arya
avalokiteshvaraya bodhisattvaya mahasattvaya mahakarunikaya | tadyatha | om dhara dhara
| dhiri dhiri | dhuru dhuru | itte bitte | tsale tsale | pratsale pratsale | kusume kusuma
| vare | ili mili tsiti dzola mapanaya soha
namo ratna-trayāya | nama ārya-jñāna-sāgara-vairocana-vyūha-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak
saṃbuddhāya | namaḥ sarva-tathāgatebhyaḥ arhadbhyaḥ samyak-sambuddhebhyaḥ | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya
bodhisattvāya mahāsattvāya mahākāruṇikāya | tadyathā | oṃ dhara dhara | dhiri
dhiri | dhuru dhuru | iṭṭe viṭṭe | cale cale | pracale pracale | kusume kusuma vare | ili
mili citi jvalam apanaye svāhā ||
Visualization
Then, holding flowers in your hand, imagine as follows:
dün gyi namkhar lama dang nyisumepé chomdendé gönpo tsé pak tu mepa la chok chü sangye dang
changchub sempa lha dang drangsong dentsik drubpa sok kyabné könchok gyatsö tsok kyi korwa
ngönsum du shyukpé shyal né shipa jöpé yang nyen drok shing metok gi char chenpo pabpé dak
dang jinpé dakpö tso jé semchen tamché kyi tsé sö paljor yeshe yönten tamché gong né gong
du pel shying gyepa dang düdrö kyé né su gyurpa nam kyang nekab dü mayinpar chiwé jikpa
lé tar shying könchok sum gyi kyab oktu dewar tsowa dang tartuk tarpé sabön gyü la min né
nyurdu changchub tobpé kalwachen du gyurpar gyur
The Blessed Protector Amitāyus, the Buddha of Boundless Life, who is indivisible from my own
teacher, appears directly in the sky before me, surrounded by an ocean-like gathering of
the precious sources of refuge, such as the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions,
the devas, and the ṛṣis whose speech is undeceiving. They chant verses of auspiciousness
in sweet melodies, showering down a great rain of flowers which expands and extends the life,
merit, wealth, wisdom, and qualities of all sentient beings, especially myself and the
sponsors of the ritual. In this way, all those who have taken birth as animals are liberated
from the fear of untimely death, and so live happily under the protection of the Three
Jewels. Ultimately, when the seed of liberation ripens within their mind-streams, they will
have the fortune of swiftly attaining awakening.
Prayers of Auspiciousness
Next, recite whatever prayers of auspiciousness come to mind, such as:
gyaltsen tsemo wang gi gyalpo tar
Like the pinnacle of a might king’s banner,
lhakpar lha yi tsuk gi gyen gyurpé
Crown ornament of the exalted deities,
drubpapo la ngödrub chok tsolwa
Please grant us practitioners the supreme accomplishment!
palden lama nam kyi tashi shok
Glorious gurus, let everything be auspicious!

tönpa lamé sangye rinpoche
Precious Buddha, the unsurpassable teacher,
kyobpa lamé damchö rinpoche
Precious Dharma, the unsurpassable protection,
drenpa lamé gendün rinpoche
Precious Saṅgha, the unsurpassable guide—
kyabné könchok sum gyi tashi shok
Threefold source of refuge, rare and supreme, let everything be auspicious!

jikten drenpé tsowo tsepakmé
Buddha of Infinite Life, foremost guide for beings in this world,
dümin chiwa malü jom dzepa
Your glory overcomes all untimely death,
gönmé dukngal gyurpa nam kyi kyab
You are a refuge for those of us who suffer without protection—
gönpo tsepakmé kyi tashi shok
Buddha Amitāyus, let everything be auspicious!
Verses from the Sūtra of Boundless Life and Wisdom13
Then recite:
jinpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of generosity are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé jinpé tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized generosity’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
jinpa tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect generosity.

tsultrim tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of discipline are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé tsultrim tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized discipline’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsultrim tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect discipline.

zöpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of patience are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé zöpé tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized patience’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
zöpa tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect patience.

tsöndrü tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of diligence are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé tsultrim tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized diligence’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsöndrü tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect diligence.

samten tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of meditation are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé samten tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized meditation’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
samten tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect meditation.

sherab tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
The buddhas who are the strength of wisdom are perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé sherab tob tok té
Lions among men, they have realized wisdom’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
sherab tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May our lifespan further increase, so that we can perfect wisdom.
Then recite the ḍhāraṇī of long-life as many times as you can and scatter flowers:
om namo bhagavate | aparimita ayurjnana subinikita tedzo radzaya | tathagataya arhate samyak
sambuddhaya | tadyata | om punye punye mahapunye aparimita punye aparimita punye jnana sambharo
patsite | om sarva samskara pari shuddha dharmate gagana samudgate sobhava vishuddhe
mahanaya parivare soha
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya
| tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite
| oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre
svāhā ||
Dedication & Aspiration Prayers
detar gyipé gewé tsawé tsön dü sum du sakpé gewé tsawé sangye kyi tenpa dar shying jikten du
gelek gyachenpo jungwa dang tendzin gyi kyebu dampa nam shyabpé ten ching trinlé gyepa dang
rang dang jindak gi tso jepé semchen tamché tsé sö paljor yeshe pelwa dang düdro nam kyang
khorwa dang ngensong gi jikpa lé drol né changchub rinpoche nyurdu tobpar shok chik
May the roots of virtue of this practice, and likewise all the roots of virtue gathered in the
past, present and future; cause the Buddhadharma to spread; cause virtue and happiness
to flourish in our world; cause the lives of the sublime upholders of the Dharma to be lengthened
and strengthened; cause their activities to thrive; cause the life, merit, wealth,
and wisdom of all sentient beings, and especially myself and the sponsors of this ritual,
to increase and be extended; and cause these animals to be liberated from the fear of saṃsāra
and the lower realms; and may they swiftly attain the precious state of awakening.
With this resolution, recite the following aspirations one-pointedly:
gewa di yi kyewo kün
Through this virtue, may all beings
sönam yeshe tsok dzok shing
Complete the accumulations of merit and wisdom,
sönam yeshe lé jungwé
And so attain the dharmakāya and rūpakāya
dampa ku nyi tobpar shok
That come from merit and wisdom.

sönam di yi tamché zikpa nyi
Through this merit, may all beings attain the omniscient state of enlightenment
tob né nyepé dra nam pam jé shing
And conquer the enemy, faults and delusion.
kyé ga na chi balong trukpa yi
May they all be liberated from this ocean of saṃsāra
sipé tso lé drowa drolwar shok
And from its pounding waves of birth, old age, sickness, and death!

gangdu kyepé tserab tamché du
In all our lives, wherever we are born,
könchok sum dang namyang mindral shying
May we never be apart from the Three Jewels.
könchok sumpo gyündu chöpa dang
May we always honor them
könchok sum gyi jinlab jukpar shok
And receive their constant blessings.

changchub sem chok rinpoche
Precious and sublime bodhicitta––
makyepa nam kyé gyur chik
May it arise in those in whom it has not yet arisen,
kyepa nyampa mepa dang
And may it never decline where it has arisen,
gong né gong du pelwar shok
But go on increasing, further and further!

pendé jungwé né chikpo
The one true source of benefit and happiness––
tenpa yün ring nepa dang
The Dharma—may it long endure!
tendzin kyebu dampa nam
May the lives of the sublime upholders of the Dharma
kutsé gyaltsen ten gyur chik
Remain steady, like a royal banner!

jikten dé shying lo lek dang
Bring peace to the world, and usher in excellent years!
dru nam pel shying chuk pelwa
May grains and livestock evermore increase;
gelek tamché jungwé né
May all happiness and goodness be ever-present;
yi la döpa kün drub dzö
And may all that we wish for be accomplished!

shyenyang kyewa di nyi du
In particular, in this very life,
mitün chok kün shyiwa dang
May everything unfavorable be pacified!
tsering nemé pün sum tsok
May we always enjoy peace, happiness, long life,
taktu dé dangden gyur chik
Good health, prosperity, and success!

sönam tobchen di yi tü
By the great power of this merit,
jindak khor dangché nam kyi
May the wishes and aims of the patrons, their friends and families,
tsé dir sampé dön drub ching
All be fulfilled in this very life!
barché shyi né trashipar
Let everything be auspicious, may they be free of obstacles,
sampa chö shyin drubpar shok
And may they accomplish their aims in accordance with the Dharma!

Thus recite whatever dedication and aspirations prayers are familiar to you. Then recite:
chewé chemchok tön chok lanamé
Unsurpassable supreme teacher, supreme among those who are great––
chöjé nyima gyalwé jinlab kyi
May your blessings, King of the Dharma, Sun-like Conqueror,
dü dang gek rik nöpé dra shyi té
Pacify harmful enemies, māras, and obstacles!
taktu pal né nyintsen tashi shok
May all be ever-glorious and auspicious, throughout day and night!

chönyi denpé chö chok lanamé
Unsurpassable supreme Dharma, the truth of dharmatā––
damchö dütsi denpé jinlab kyi
May the blessings of the nectar of truth that is the sublime Dharma
nyönmong duk nga dungwé dra shyi té
Pacify our painful enemies––the afflictions, the five poisons!
taktu pal né nyintsen tashi shok
May all be ever-glorious and auspicious, throughout day and night!

gendün yönten rinchen pal barwa
Saṅgha, blazing with the glory of precious noble qualities––
gyalsé pen dzé denpé jinlab kyi
May the blessings of the truth of bodhisattvas’ beneficial deeds
nyepé kyöndral gé tsok nampar pel
Increase every virtue, free from negativity!
taktu pal né nyintsen tashi shok
May all be ever-glorious and auspicious, throughout day and night!

Having recited verses of auspiciousness such as these, conclude with:
chimé tsé yi pal la longchö ching
The enjoyment and splendour of an everlasting deathless life,
rigpé lo dang namchö sherab dang
Keen intellect, discernment, and insight,
si dang shyiwé paljor gang lakpa
And all the riches and glories of existence and quiescence––
dé kün lhün gyi drubpé tashi shok
May they all be spontaneously accomplished, we pray!

sönam dargyé ri gyal lhünpo shyin
May merit ever increase, becoming like Meru, lofty king of mountains!
nyendrak chenpo namkha shyindu khyab
May great fame and renown pervade the whole of the sky!
tsering nemé shyendön lhündrubpé
May there be the constant auspiciousness of a sublime ocean of qualities––
yönten gyatso chok gi tashi shok
Long life, good health, and spontaneous benefit for others!

né dir nyinmo delek tsen delek
May this very place itself enjoy happiness and peace, at dusk and at dawn!
nyin mé gung yang delek shing
May midday too be delightful and comfortable!
nyintsen taktu delek pé
May the auspiciousness of the Three Jewels be ever-present,
könchok sum gyi tashi shok
Causing peace and happiness throughout day and night!
Then conclude properly, by reciting the ye-dharmā while scattering flowers:
om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat | teshan tsa yo nirodha evam vadi
maha shramana soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhāvā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hyavadat | teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā ||
It is stated in another longevity practice:14
Mark the animals that you were able to ransom, by drawing a sun and moon on their foreheads.
This mark will show others that these animals are not to be killed.
It is also taught that drawing a sun and moon on their foreheads with butter creates the auspicious
condition for their lifespan to become equal to the sun and moon. It is further taught
that giving auspicious names to some of the finest livestock with white spots will create
auspicious conditions for the future. Follow this advice.
Protect the lives of wild animals—such as birds, fish, or deer—and do not catch them with traps
and the like. As explained above, seal your efforts with the motivation of bodhicitta
and with dedication and aspiration prayers. By further combining this with practices such
as the sang (smoke) offering, the benefits of freeing lives in this way will be beyond imagination.
The region where you apply these instructions will have auspicious signs, such as seasonal rainfall,
bountiful harvests, and abundant livestock.
In The Precious Garland,15 the noble Nāgārjuna states:
At the openings of anthills,
Have the trustworthy
Always put food, water,
Sugar and piles of grains.
As advised, train in giving—such as offering sustenance to ants and other animals, grains to
fish, medicine to the sick, meals to children, food and drink to birds and the destitute.
This should of course be embraced by the skilful means of bodhicitta, dedication, and aspiration.
If you do this, the resulting merit will become a cause for preventing death and
increasing vitality, ultimately leading to the attainment of great awakening. Since these
instructions are easy to follow, involve little hardship, and yield great benefits, intelligent
people should by all means strive in becoming skilled in these methods for gathering
the accumulations.

Motivated by bodhicitta, I, Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo, a devotee of the bodhisattva-piṭaka, have
composed this ritual for the benefit of myself and others. May it be a cause for the sublime
upholders of the Dharma to live for hundreds of eons, for all sentient beings to be
freed from the fear of untimely death, and for all without exception to swiftly attain the
state of Amitāyus, the Buddha of Boundless Life. Sarva Maṅgalam!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang, Peter Woods and Paul Thomas, ed. Libby Hogg),
2021. The verses from the Sūtra of Boundless Life and Wisdom courtesy of Adam Pearcey.

'jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. “srog slu bya tshul tshe dpal rgyas byed ces bya ba bzhugs
so” in mkhyen brtse'i dbang po’i gsung 'bum. 25 vols. Gangtok: rdzong gsar dgon pa'i
par khang, 1977–1980. W21807 Vol. 21 (zha): 308–313.

Version: 2.1-20211025
↑ The quotation is found in a slightly different form in Vāgīśvarakīrti’s Pith Instructions
on Deceiving Death (Toh. 1748, mṛtyuvañcanopadeśa, ‘chi ba bslu ba’i man ngag).↑ The first
month of the Tibetan calendar.↑ The eighth day of the lunar month is associated with Medicine
Buddha and Tārā.↑ Depending upon an individual’s birth year, a particular day of the
week is considered conducive to long-life practice.↑ While the Seven Sugatas can refer to
the Seven Heroic Buddhas (sangs rgyas dpa' bo bdun), here it refers to a set of seven ‘medicine
buddhas’ mentioned in two kriyā-yoga tantras, namely The Sūtra Describing in Full the
Specific Previous Vows of the Seven Tathāgatas (Toh. 503, sapta-tathāgata-pūrva-praṇi­dhāna-viśeṣa-vistāra-sūtra,
phags pa de bzhin gshegs pa bdun gyi sngon gyi smon lam gyi khyad
par rgyas pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo) and The Incantation of Vaiḍūrya-prabhā (Toh.
505, tathāgata-vaiḍūrya-prabhā-nāma-balādhāna-samādhi-dhāraṇī; bai DUr+ya'i 'od gyi gzungs.
As outlined by Toh. 503, invoking and making offerings to these Seven Buddhas is said
to cure diseases and can “interrupt the death process and call a dying person’s consciousness
back to their body.”)↑ Skt. Supari-kīrtita-nāma-śrī-rāja.↑ Skt. Kuśala-­tejo-nir­ghoṣa-­rāja.↑
Skt. Suvarṇa-bhadra-vimala-ratna-prabhāsa-vrata-siddhi.↑ Skt. Aśokottama-śrī.↑
Skt. Dharma-kīrti-sāgara-ghoṣa.↑ Skt. Dharma-sāgarāgramati-vikrīḍitābhi-jñā-rāja.↑ Skt. Bhaiṣajya-guru-vaiḍūrya-prabha.↑
The verses and the dhāraṇī that follows come from The Sublime
Sūtra of the Great Vehicle entitled “Boundless Life and Wisdom” (Toh. 675, ārya-aparimita-āyurjñāna-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra,
‘phags pa tshe dang ye shes dpag tu med pa zhes bya ba
theg pa chen po’i mdo)↑ The following quotations appears to come from the Embodiment of the
Families of the Deathless Three Kāyas ('chi med sku gsum rigs 'dus) revealed by Changdak
Tashi Tobgyal.↑ The full title of this famous text by Nāgārjuna is Precious Garland of Advice
for a King (Toh. 4158, rājaparikathāratnāvali, rgyal po la gtam bya ba rin po che'i phreng
ba)